---
layout: post
title: Response to Criticisms of RSS
date: '2018-01-18T09:12:00+00:00'
hidden: true
summary: Hidden post, short thoughts on some of the advantages of RSS.
---

In response to: [https://twitter.com/Cennydd/status/953896132551368704](https://twitter.com/Cennydd/status/953896132551368704)

---

**Tl;dr: current understandings and implementations of RSS are terrible. The underlying idea and tech isn't so bad.**

Podcasts are way ahead of content publishers in utilising RSS in a much more mainstream user-friendly manner. I don't have to care that I receive updates from my favourite podcasts because of RSS, nor do I have to worry about hunting for obscure, meaningless orange icons that sort of looks like the WiFi icon but not quite, and equally useless variations on the call to action of "Subscribe to my RSS feed". Yes, the podcast app interpreting the feed falls into the gatekeeper category, but they are recent evidence that UX concerns around RSS can be overcome.

The current model for RSS in content publication is terribly outdated and is rooted in a web that had no concept of "follow". Solutions for subscribing and reading were built and settled upon in a time where we spoke differently telling users that are pages were "W3C XHTML 1.1 valid" and RSS subscription buttons would sit alongside these badges. So I'm with you on the criticisms of our current solutions for subscribing and interpreting RSS such as terrible UX, filter bubbles, weak value props, partial feeds, clickbait, gatekeeping - all valid.

Hypothetically speaking if RSS treated with the same regard as bookmarking in that it's light, meaningful and at a browser level provides understandable consequences then it arguably solves the weak value proposition concern. Depending on the implementation, it mitigates the UX concern. As with social media, the books you read, and pretty much *anything* you consume - your filter bubble is as big as you make it, social media shapes this heavier than most examples, but again depending on implementation, you can make steps towards fixing that. I'm not saying I have solutions and I don't want to try and invent them on the spot, but broadly speaking the less software in the chain of user, OS, browser, RSS reader - the better.

I doubt we'd arrive at the same failed outcomes we have today if RSS was introduced in 2018 as new tech now that we have a better understanding of online social interactions, making awkward things accessible along with a desire for decentralisation. I know users voted for centralisation, but I refuse to believe the answer is simply to cave in to centralisation and accept that this is how it must be. **The web is wider than that** and it's unfortunate that mainstream users don't know that. For me, that's the greater social good I'd like to chase. There are genuinely useful things out there that forward the human experience outside of the heavily skewed discovery offered by these centralised hubs.
